# GearUpMod1Pre-work.md

#Reflect

What role does empathy play in your life and how has it helped you?<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;*Empathy plays a major role in my life and always has. I think it's what has helped me get through a rough childhood and what has given me a unique advantage when navigating professional environments as an adult. When you are empathetic (and when you practice empathy) you are able to catch a lot of things that others may miss. I can often pick up on the needs of others and I notice microexpressions and small cues from body language. Implied meanings are generally absorbed easily and this allows me to read between the lines, grasp what's at the heart of what people truly need, and allows me to answer those needs in a unique way. Empathy allows me to see the world in a different way: when you can walk in someone else's shoes you can gain a world of experience.<br/>
How does empathy help you build better software?<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;*Empathy gives up the ability to understand how important it is to actively listen to others and to observe them interacting with software...and even simply to observe them interacting in their day to day lives. When we're willing to try to walk in someone's shoes we can see what is at the heart of a problem and find custom-fit, efficient, smart solutions. Without being able to empathize with someone we could miss an opportunity to provide much needed assistance; worse than this, we could end up making a problem worse. We have the unique ability, as software engineers, to shape the whole world in a very short period of time, by just building an environment that people will interact with and may use for vital life functions. Software can change whole industries, can affect minorities, can affect those will disabilities, and can alter the norms in societies. Understanding how our creations can affect lives will be important going forward.<br/>
Why is empathy important for working on a team?<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;*Empathy is so important when working on a team. Humans are geared (innately) to be egocentric. This is at the heart of the study of psychology. It will take constant self-awareness and introspection to keep this always in mind and in check. It's easy to think that your idea is the best, the most inspired, makes the most sense, etc. but this isn't always the case (and perhaps is rarely the case). When we can step outside of our egos and look through someone else's eyes, and can truly weigh the merit of good ideas, we can work better as a team and can produce a beautiful product (and a harmonious workspace). It is also critical that we understand that each person on a team is coming in with a different background. People will approach problems differently, have different frameworks of thinking, have different triggers, belief systems, etc. When we're cognisant and respectful of our differences we can rationally approach situations. This is allows us to understand that not everyone will see things like us and it removes a lot of miscommunication and frustration. When we can start from a place of empathy, understanding, and rationality we can hit the ground running and avoid interpersonal gridlock situations.<br/>
Describe a situation in which your ability to empathize with a colleague or teammate was helpful.<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;*I worked with a woman who was initially really rude to me. I would approach her kindly and professionally and always got a hostile attitude in return. I chose not to react similarly but instead would choose to sit somewhat near to her on break, not forcing myself on her but merely letting her know that I wasn't a threat: I would engage in conversations with people around her and over time she began to speak with me too. I wanted her to "humanize" me and connect to me and wanted to understand what was at the heart of her anger. Eventually I found out that there was a lot of frustration behind her anger. I was new to the job and I had walked into working on a shift that she had been trying to get for a year. She also was running two businesses outside of this full-time job and was exhausted and at her wits end. Later she confided in me that she was going through a horrible break up around that time as well and was really questioning her whole life, worth, and spirituality. It pays to not react and to understand that people may have a whole lot more going on behind the scenes. We often need to give people the space to come around on their own terms and simply hold our ground and remain respectful. If I would have written her off, I would have missed out on many opportunities to be there for her in the future, and would have missed out on a beautiful friendship.<br/>
When do you find it most difficult to be empathetic in professional settings? How can you improve your skills when faced with these scenarios?<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;*I find it most difficult to be empathetic when people are intensely hateful and confrontational with myself and others. I think this is pretty common to feel this way (intimidated by bullies) and it's hard to give back grace and empathy when you feel like someone is evil incarnate (which I really don't come across often). This is especially difficult when someone is prone to attacking those that I sense are way more sensitive and maybe in a weaker position. I know that I can work on being a lot more honest. I can sometimes want to run from confrontation but the last few years I've really been practicing simply sitting with discomfort and fear: staying with it and speaking calmly. Honestly, I believe that most people, when they're approached calmly, honestly, using very succint words, snap out of their cruelty. I think even the cruelest individuals realize that it doesn't pay to continue perpetuating harm, when they know they're drawing attention to themselves and risk repercussions in a place of employment.<br/>
